README.md, before:

# Visplot
Visibility plot and observation scheduling tool for telescopes. It allows automatic, nearly-optimal scheduling of an entire observing night.

![Visplot](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/egafton/visplot/master/img/snapshot.png "Snapshot of Visplot")

## Using Visplot
The latest version of Visplot is hosted publicly at [https://www.visplot.com](https://www.visplot.com). You can use it without installing anything on your computer.

## Local installation
These instructions will get you a copy of the project up and running on your local machine (e.g., for development and testing purposes).

### Prerequisites

* a web server (e.g., Apache) that can run PHP scripts (i.e., `mod_php` enabled);
* a modern browser with HTML5 support (Visplot may load but not display correctly on older browsers, or it may fail to load at all);

### Installation on Ubuntu 22.04

* Make sure your installation is up-to-date:

  ```bash
  sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade
  ```

* Install Apache and PHP:

  ```bash
  sudo apt install apache2 php libapache2-mod-php
  ```

* Enable Apache and PHP (adapt the PHP version number if necessary):

  ```bash
  sudo systemctl enable apache2
  sudo a2enmod php8.1
  ```

* Restart the Apache server:

  ```bash
  sudo systemctl restart apache2
  ```

Test that the installation has been successful by navigating to `http://localhost/`.

If so, you can just copy the Visplot files to `/var/www/html/{SUBDIR}` and
access them via a browser at `http://localhost/{SUBDIR}`. If Visplot is the
only page that will run on your server, `{SUBDIR}` can and should be empty.

## License

Visplot is released under the GNU General Public License, version 3 (GPL3) license. See [`LICENSE.md`](LICENSE.md) for the full text of the license.

Commit message:

Added Docker files and updated README

README.md, after:

# Visplot
Visibility plot and observation scheduling tool for telescopes. It allows automatic, nearly-optimal scheduling of an entire observing night.

![Visplot](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/egafton/visplot/master/img/snapshot.png "Snapshot of Visplot")

## Using Visplot
The latest version of Visplot is hosted publicly at [https://www.visplot.com](https://www.visplot.com). You can use it without installing anything on your computer.

## Local installation
These instructions will get you a copy of the project up and running on your local machine (e.g., for development and testing purposes).

### Prerequisites

* `docker` and `docker-compose`;
* a modern browser with HTML5 support (Visplot may load but not display correctly on older browsers, or it may fail to load at all);

### Starting the container

* ```bash
  docker compose up --build --detach visplot
  ```

Test that the installation has been successful by navigating to `http://localhost:8888/`.

## License

Visplot is released under the GNU General Public License, version 3 (GPL3) license. See [`LICENSE.md`](LICENSE.md) for the full text of the license.
